Chapter 12Ś crisis
Three men of Earth stared at the big Capellan, and for a long, long moment no one spoke. Gorr Holl became absorbed in the glass he held between his hands. Magro watched them with his bright cat eyes. The beautiful streaming light poured over them, and the men were like three images of stone.

Bertram Garris found his tongue at last. But it was only to repeat Gorr HollÆs words, as Kenniston had translated them.

ōEvacuation?ö he said. And again,ōEvacuation?ö

ōTo the world of another star,ö said Kenniston slowly. His mouth twitched, and he leaned close to Gorr Holl, and cried, ōWhat do you think weÆre made of?ö

Gorr Holl looked around their faces, and then said ruefully, ōI guess IÆve talked too much.ö His ruefulness was no more convincing than his earlier surprise.

Mayor Garris had begun to tremble. A fury was building up in him, a genuine fury that had nothing to do with display. He glared at Magro and at Gorr Holl.

ōThey knew this all along, that woman and the others,ö he said. ōThey came in here, pretending to be our friends, and all the time behind our backsģö He stopped. His wrath and fear were all but choking him, coming so swiftly after joy. His voice went up and octave. ōYou tell them, Kenniston, tell them from meŚ if they think weÆre going to move clear off the Earth to someŚ someŚö he stammered over the sheer impossibility of what he was saying, ōŚ some damn fool place out in the skyŚ well, theyÆre crazy!ö

Hubble said to Kenniston, ōAsk him if this is a thing they do, these Governors? I mean, this moving of whole populations from one world to another?ö

Gorr Holl nodded to that. ōOh, yes. Whenever life on some planet becomes economically unsound, or the margin of survival is too small, the Governors evacuate the people to a better world. There are lots of them, good warm fertile planets that are uninhabited or nearly so. They did it to some of my own people, moved them from Capella Five to Aldebaran.ö

Kenniston cried out of his anger, ōAnd people let that be done to them? They didnÆt even resist it?ö

Gorr Holl said, ōPeopleŚ human people, I meanŚ have got millions of years of civilization behind them. TheyÆre used to peaceful government, used to obedience, and theyÆve been moving from world to world ever since they left Earth ages ago, so that one planet doesnÆt mean much more than another to them. But the primitive humanoid folk, lately civilized, like my own and MagroÆs, arenÆt so reasonable. ThereÆs been a good bit of resentment among them about this evacuation business. In fact, they hate itŚ just as much as you do.ö

ōHere!ö said Hubble sharply. ōWhere are you going?ö He was talking to the Mayor, who was striding suddenly toward the door. He caught Garris by the coat and pulled him back. The Mayor struggled sullenly to free himself.

ōIÆm going to tell them,ö he said, jerking his head toward the sounds of revelry that came from the crowd of Middletowners in the plaza. ōMove off the Earth? TheyÆll have something to say about that!ö

ōWhat do you want to do?ö snapped Hubble. ōStart a riot? DonÆt be a fool, thatÆs no way to handle this. No, itÆs that ice-water blonde weÆve got to talk to, and that fellow Lund.ö He shook Garris. ōStop it, I say! Going off half-cocked will only make it harder for everyone.ö

Garris stopped struggling. He looked from Hubble to Kenniston and back again. ōAll right,ö he said, ōweÆll talk to them. But theyÆd better get it through their heads that theyÆre not dealing with any flock of tame sheep.ö He stamped back into the room. ōOrdering us off our own world..! Get those two freaks out of here, Kenniston. I was right the first time. TheyÆre not to be trusted, theyÆreģö

ōOh, shut up,ö said Kenniston impatiently. ōGorr and Margo donÆt make the laws. TheyÆre simply being decent enough to give us fair warning of something we wouldnÆt have known about until it was too late.ö He knew there was more in it than that, but he was too hurried and upset to search for deeper motives now. He turned to Gorr and the Spican.

ōListen,ö he said. ōYouÆve seen how the Mayor reacted. Well, I can assure you that all our people will react just that way, only more so. Tell that to Varn Allan, and tell her that sheÆd better come here and talk about this evacuation before she gets in too deep. Tell her we donÆt like having things done behind our backs. Tell herŚö He caught himself, surprised by his own fury. ōNo, I guess you couldnÆt tell her that,ö he said, and Gorr Holl grinned.

ōAs one primitive to another, I get your meaning.ö

ōWell, all right. And GorrŚ you and Magro and the others better stay out of the city. When this thing breaks, I wouldnÆt guarantee anybodyÆs safety.ö

ōOh,ö said Gorr Holl, and grinned very widely so that even his grinders glistened, ōweÆll be quite safe, confined to quarters in the ship. We, or rather I, have done an evil thing. We have spoken out of turn, and upset the Policy.ö

The three of them, humanoids and human, looked at each other, and there was understanding between them. Kenniston put his hand on Gorr HollÆs furry shoulder, and gripped the iron muscles of it, and Magro said, ōOne more thing, Kenniston. If thereÆs troubleŚ and I seem to smell trouble very strongly in the airŚ watch out for Lund. Varn Allan may be much too sure of herself, but sheÆs honest. LundŚ well, he wants VarnÆs job, and he will cheerfully cut anyoneÆs throat to get it.ö

ōThat is so,ö said Gorr Holl. ōRemember, Kenniston.ö

ōIÆll remember. AndŚ thanks.ö

They went away, to take the message of defiance to the ship. Kenniston watched them go, and the Mayor watched them, and they listened to the cheering that followed them all the way to the portal.

ōIÆm sorry I called them freaks,ö the Mayor said suddenly. ōBy God, theyÆre more like us than the people in that ship!ö

Hubble nodded. ōTheir culture level is closer to ours. They havenÆt lost their old aboriginal roots. Our own people have gone too far beyond us. The whole pattern of their thinking is different. WeŚ well, weÆre strangers now, to our own kind.ö

To Kenniston, the cheering and the happiness of the Middletowners out there was an ironically bitter thing, now. If they knew what was being planned for themģ

He said to Hubble, nodding his head toward the Mayor, ōWill you stick with him and keep him from telling everyone? HeÆll listen to you more than to anyone.ö

Hubble said, ōI will. You get some sleep, Ken. YouÆve been working a tough grindŚ and the Allan woman and Lund wonÆt likely come before morning.ö

And Kenniston slept, but neither much nor well. In spite of his exhaustion, Gorr HollÆs words rang like passing bells in his mind all the rest of that nightŚ evacuate, evacuateŚ to the world of another star. And he thought of all the people of Middletown who happily believed their troubles were over, and of CarolŚ particularly of CarolŚ and most of all he thought of Varn Allan, whom he had begun to hate. And he was afraid.

It did not take much imagination to divine what the MayorÆs narrowness had missedŚ a vast and powerful machinery of government directing this future universe, a machinery of which the big starship and its occupants were but a symbol. It did not seem likely that a handful of people on a dying planet could successfully defy that government for very long.

Hubble woke him at last out of an uneasy slumber, to tell him that Varn Allan and Lund had come, and that the Mayor had called the City Council.

ōWe need you to interpret, Ken,ö he said. ōYou speak the language better than any of us, and this is too important to take any chances of misunderstanding.ö

Neither of them talked much on the way to the soaring tower that was now City Hall. And Kenniston could see that Hubble was as worried and oppressed as he.

A crowd had gathered in the plaza, a happy crowd, come to cheer their good friends who had helped them so much. Inside City Hall, the Council of Middletown sat around a massive metal table. The Mayor, Borchard the coal dealer, Moretti the wholesale produce merchant, half a dozen more, facing at one end of the table the woman and the man who came from Vega and who were Administrators over a vast sector of space with all its worlds and peoples.

Mayor Garris fastened on Kenniston the moment he came in. He looked as though he had slept even less than Kenniston, and his mood had not changed since the night before.

ōYou ask her, Kenniston,ö he said. ōYou ask her if this evacuation story is true.ö He asked her.

Varn Allan nodded. ōQuite true. IÆm sorry that Gorr Holl spoke so prematurelyŚ is seems to have upset your people.ö She glanced at the ominous faces of the City Council and the tense countenance of the Mayor. It struck Kenniston that she had been all through this situation before with other populations, and was attacking the problem with a kind of weary patience.

ōI am sure,ö she said, ōthat when they understand, they will realize that we are only serving their best interests.ö

ōBest interests?ö cried Garris, when he had heard that. ōThen why didnÆt you tell us at first? Why plan this behind our backs?ö

Norden Lund, a smug look on his face, said to the woman, ōI told you it would have been betterŚö

ōWeÆll discuss that later,ö she flashed. Kenniston could see the effort she made to keep her imperious temper in check as she went on, speaking directly to him, ōWe wanted to wait until we could present a complete plan of evacuation, so as not to upset your people too much.ö

ōIn other words,ö said Kenniston angrily, ōyou were dealing with a bunch of primitive aborigines who had to be coaxed along?ö

ōArenÆt you acting in just such fashion?ö Varn Allan demanded. Again, she visibly got a grip on her irritation. She said, carefully as though explaining to a child, ōA shipful of evacuation experts is on its way here, should arrive soon. They can assess the needs of your people, and find a world that will fit their physical and psychological needs. We will see that it is a world as much like your past Earth as possible.ö

ōThat,ö said Kenniston ironically, ōis very decent of you.ö The womanÆs blue eyes flashed open hostility at him. He turned away from her, for Garris was demanding a translation. He gave it, and in his own resentment he did not soften it.

Garris forgot oratory, in his indignation. He sputtered, ōIf they think we are going to move away from Earth to some crazy world out in the sky, theyÆre badly mistaken! You make that clear to them!ö

Varn Allan looked honestly bewildered, when Kenniston did. ōBut surely you people donÆt want to stay in the cold and hardship of this dying world?ö

Kenniston, watching the anger and the instinctive, basic fear grow still stronger in the MayorÆs white face, could understand his feelings. His own reaction was the same.

ōNot want to stay here?ö said Garris, forcing words out painfully from a throat constricted with emotion. ōNot want to? Listen, you people! We have left our own time. We have had to leave our own city, our homes. ThatÆs enough. ItÆs all we can stand in one lifetime. Leave Earth, leave our own world? No!ö There was no oratory about him now, at all. He was like a man who has been asked to die.

Kenniston spoke to Varn Allan. His own voice was not quite steady. ōTry to understand. We are Earth-born. Our whole life, all the generations before us, since the beginningģö

He could not put it into words, this sudden passionate oneness with Earth.

The Earth hath He given to the children of menģ The Earth, the soil, the winds and the rains, the growth and the dying over the ages, beast and tree and man. You could not forget that. You could not let drop the heritage of a world as though it had never been.

The sorrel-haired Norden Lund was speaking to Varn Allan, looking contemptuously at the Middletowners as he spoke. ōI warned you, Varn, that these primitives are too emotional for ordinary methods.ö

The woman, her blue eyes troubled, ignored Lund and addressed Kenniston. ōYou must make them recognize the facts. Life here is impossible, and therefore they must go.ö

ōLet her tell that to the people,ö said the Mayor, in an oddly tight voice. ōNo. IÆll tell them myself.ö

He rose and left the council room. There was a curious dignity about his plump figure now. Borchard and Moretti and the others followed. They, too, showed a shrinking, instinctive dread of the thing that had been proposed. They went out on the steps, and Kenniston and Hubble and the two from the stars went with them.

Outside in the plaza were still gathered thousands of the Middletowners, millhand, housewife, banker and bookkeeper, the old men and the little children. They were still happy, and they cheered, sending up a great joyous shout to echo from the towers.

Mayor Garris took the microphone of the loudspeaker system.

ōFolks, listen carefully! These new people are telling us now that we ought to leave Earth. They say theyÆll give us a better world, somewhere out there among the stars. What about it? Do you want to goŚ away from Earth?ö

There was a long moment of utter silence, in which Kenniston saw the MiddletownersÆ faces grow bewildered, incredulous. He looked at Van AllanÆs clearcut face and saw that the shadow of weariness on it was deeper. He realized again that two epochs, two utterly different ways of life were looking at each other here, and finding it difficult to understand each other.

When, finally, the crowd of Middletowners had grasped the suggestion, their answer came as a rising chorus of exclamations.

ōGo off and live someplace in the sky? Are these people nuts?ö

ōIt was bad enough to leave Middletown for this place! But to leave Earth?ö

A large-handed, stocky man whom Kenniston recognized as Lauber, McLainÆs truckdriver, came to the steps and spoke up to the Mayor.

ōWhatÆs all this about, anyway? WeÆre getting along here all right now. Why would we want to go off to the Moon or somewhere?ö

The Mayor turned to the two star-folk. ōYou see? My people wouldnÆt listen to an idea like that for a minute!ö

Kenniston told the woman, ōThe people completely reject the whole proposal.ö

Varn Allan stared at him, in honest surprise. ōBut it is not a æproposalÆŚ it is a formal order of the Board of Governors! I recommended this evacuation, and they have approved it.ö

Kenniston said dryly, ōUnfortunately, our people donÆt recoganize any authority but their own government, so the order means nothing to them.ö

The woman looked appalled. ōBut nobody defies the Governors! They are the executive body of the whole Federation of Stars.ö

The Federation of Stars? It had a sound of distant thunder in it, and again Kenniston realized the incomprehensible, staggering vastness of the civilization out there which this woman and this man represented.

He said, exasperated, ōCanÆt you understand that to these people the stars are just points of light in the sky? That your Suns and worlds and Governors mean nothing to them?ö

Norden Lund chose that moment to intervene. He said smoothly to Varn Allan, ōPerhaps, in an impasse of this nature, we should consult Government Center?ö

She gave him a hot look. ōYou would like me to admit my incapacity by doing that. No. IÆll carry this matter through, and when itÆs done IÆll have words to say to Gorr Holl for precipitating things prematurely.ö

She turned to Kenniston, and said, ōYour people must comprehend that this is not a cruel thing weÆre doing. Explain to them what life would be like on this dead planetŚ isolated, precarious, increasingly difficult, with nothing to look forward to but an ultimate dying out of attrition and sheer hopelessness. Perhaps theyÆll realize then that what theyÆre asking me to do is to abandon them to a very ugly fate.ö

ōPerhaps,ö said Kenniston, ōbut I wouldnÆt count on it. You donÆt know us yet. As a people, weÆre neither soft nor easily frightened.ö

He spoke with hostility, because of the truth that he had recognized in Varn AllanÆs words, and did not want to recognize.

She gave him a level glance, as though she were taking his measure and through him the measure of all Middletown. Then she said quietly, ōBear in mind that a formal decree passed by the Board of Governors is a law which must be respected and complied with. The evacuation has been ordered, and will be carried out.ö

She nodded to Lund, who shrugged and fell in beside her. They went down the steps and across the plaza, and the muttering crowd, alarmed and confused but not yet hostile, moved apart to let them through.

Kenniston turned to Hubble. ōWhat are we going to do?ö he said, and the older man shook his head.

ōI donÆt know. But I know one thing we must not do, and that is to let any violence occur. That would be fatal. WeÆve got to calm people down before that evacuation staff arrives and brings things to a head.ö

Kenniston did his best, during the rest of that day. He repeated Varn AllanÆs plea for understanding, but it fell on unreceptive ears. The city was functioning, they had light and water, they were not alone in the universe, and life today seemed pretty good. With the irrepressible optimism of the human race, they were convinced that they could make tomorrow even better. And they were not going to leave Earth. That was like asking them to leave their bodies.

The shock of losing their own time and the pattern of life that went with it had been terrible enough. It might have overwhelmed them completely, Kenniston knew, except that in a measure the shock had been softened. For a while they had kept their own old city, and it was still there beyond the ridge, an anchor in their memories. To a certain extent, they had brought their own time with them, for life in the alien city had been adapted as much as possible to the pattern of life in old Middletown. They had oriented themselves again, they had built a facsimile of their familiar existence. It had been hard, but they had done it. They could not now, quite suddenly, throw it all away and start again on something utterly divorced from everything they had ever known.

Kenniston realized perfectly that it was not only an atavistic clinging to the Earth that had bred them which made them reject the idea of leaving it so fiercely. It was the physical and immediate horror of entering a perfectly unknown kind of ship and plunging in it out beyond the sky, intoŚ into what? Night and nothingness and sickening abysses that ran on for ever, with only the cold stars for beacons and the Earth, the solid, understandable, protecting Earth lost forever! His own mind recoiled from the very imagining. Why couldnÆt the woman understand? Why couldnÆt she realize that a people to whom the automobile was still quite recent were not psychologically capable of rushing into space!

The great ship brooded on the plain, and all that afternoon and evening the people drifted restlessly toward the wall of the dome to look at it, and stand in little groups talking angrily, and move away again. The streets seethed with a half-heard murmur of voices and movement. Crowds gathered in the plaza, and a detachment of National Guardsmen in full kit went marching down to mount guard at the portal. Dejected, oppressed, and more than a little sick with worry, Kenniston faced the unavoidable and went to Carol.

She knew, of course. Everybody in New Middletown knew. She met him with the drawn, half-bitter look that had come more and more often on her face since the June day their world had ended, and she said, ōThey canÆt do it, can they? They canÆt make us go?ö

ōThey think theyÆre doing the right thing,ö he said. ōItÆs a question of making them understand theyÆre wrong.ö

She began to laugh, quite softlyŚ laughter with no mirth in it. ōThere isnÆt any end to it,ö she said. ōFirst we had to leave Middletown. Now we have to leave Earth, Why didnÆt we stay in our homes and die there, if we had to, like decent human beings? ItÆs all been madness ever sinceŚ this city, and nowģö She stopped laughing. She looked at him and said calmly, ōI wonÆt go, Ken.ö

ōYouÆre not the only one that feels that way,ö Kenniston told her. ōWeÆve got to convince them of that.ö Restlessness rode him, and he got up and said, ōLetÆs take a walk. WeÆd both feel better.ö

She went out with him into the dusk. The lights were on, the lovely radiance that they had greeted with such joy. They walked, saying very little, burdened with their own thoughts, and Kenniston was conscious again of the barrier that seemed always between them now, even when they agreed. Their silence was not the silence of understanding, but the silence which is between two minds that can communicate only with words.

They drifted toward the section of the dome through which the distant starship was visible. The unease in the city had grown, until the air quivered with it. There was a mob around the portal. They did not go close to it. Through the curved, transparent wall the lighted bulk of the Thanis was no more than a distorted gleaming. Carol shivered and turned away.

ōI donÆt want to look at it,ö she said. ōLetÆs go back.ö

ōWait,ö said Kenniston. ōThereÆs Hubble.ö

The older man caught sight of him and swore. ōIÆve been hunting the hell and gone over town for you,ö he said. ōKen, that bloody fool Garris has blown his top completely, and is getting the people all stirred up to fight. YouÆve got to come with me and help soothe him down!ö

Kenniston said bitterly, ōNo wonder Varn Allan thinks weÆre a bunch of primitives! Oh, all right, IÆll come. WeÆll walk you back home on the way, Carol.ö

They started back through the streets, whose towers now shone timelessly beautiful in the calm white radiance. But the people in those streets, the little tense, talking groups, the worried faces and questions, the angry expletives, jarred against that supernal calm.

The pulse of unease in the city seemed to quicken. A low cry ran along the streets. People were calling something, a shout was running along the ways, hands pointed upward, white faces turned and looked at the shimmer of the great dome above.

ōWhatŚö Hubble began impatiently, but Kenniston silenced him.

ōListen!ö

They listened. Above the swell of distant voices, growing louder every moment, they heard a sound that they had heard only once before. A vibration, more than a sound, a deep, bass humming from the sky, too deep to be smothered even by the dome.

It came downward, and it was louder, and louder, and then quite suddenly it stopped. People were running now toward the portal and the words they shouted came drifting confusedly back.

ōAnother starship,ö said Kenniston. ōAnother starship has come.ö

HubbleÆs face was gray and haggard. ōThe evacuation staff. She said theyÆd arrive soon. And the whole town ready to blow offŚ Ken, this is it!ö