Chapter 5Ś in the red dawn
Kenniston was aroused next morning by the sharp summons of the telephone. He awoke with chill, stiff limbs on the sofa where he had dozed fitfully during the night. He had fired the coal furnace half a dozen times, but the house was cold and white frost was thick on the storm windows. He stood up, heavy with sleep, oppressed with a sense of evil things but still mercifully vague, and stumbled mechanically toward the phone. It was not until he heard HubbleÆs voice on the wire that his mind cleared and he remembered yesterday.

HubbleÆs message was brief. ōWill you get over here, Ken? The Keystone coal yard. IÆm afraid thereÆs going to be trouble.ö Kenniston said, ōRight away.ö He hung up and stood where he was for a moment, painfully adjusting himself to the realization of how different today was from all the other days of his life. His hands and feet were numb, and his breath steamed faintly in the room. Presently he stirred himself, going hastily to the cellar, where he dug into the dwindling dregs of last winterÆs coal.

Carol was there when he went back up. She wore her fur coat over her night things, and her eyes were heavy and shadowed, as though she had not slept much. ōThe phone woke me,ö she said. ōIs itģ?ö

She did not finish. It was ridiculous to inquire whether the call had brought bad news. They were all existing in a horror dream in which everything was bad.

He only told her that Hubble wanted him for a while. Then, a little hesitantly, he put his arms around her. ōYouÆre all right now?ö he asked.

ōYes. Ken. IÆm all right.ö But her voice was remote and tired, and had no life in it.

Kenniston did not refer to the night before, to the time after the MayorÆs apocalpytic announcement. Of all the bad moments he had had that day, that one had been the worst. Mrs. Adams did the expected things, which he could cope with by means of brandy and ammonia capsules, but Carol did not. She sat quite still, looking at him in a way that he had never seen before. The Mayor had told the full truth about the Industrial Research Laboratory. It had been necessary, to explain why HubbiesÆ statements were authoritative. Kenniston wished that he had told Carol about it himself. It seemed an unimportant thing in the face of the worldÆs end, and yet he felt that to her it was not unimportant at all. He could not talk it out with her then, with Mrs. AdamsÆ hysterics dominating everything, and she had not come out to him later, and now, facing her again this morning, Kenniston felt unsure of himself and of her for the first time since he had met her.

ōStay inside and keep the furnace going,ö he said. ōIÆll be back as soon as I can.ö He kissed her, and she stood there in the circle of his arms, neither yielding nor resisting. He said, almost desperately, ōDonÆt give up, Carol. WeÆll find an answer to it all, somehow.ö

She nodded and said, ōYes. Be careful,ö and turned away. Kenniston went out alone, into the bitter morning.

It was still half dark, for the sullen Sun had not quite risen, sprawling in the east like some bloated monster heavy with blood. He refilled the jeepÆs radiator, which he had drained the night before. It was very still, he noticed. The mill whistles, the delivery trucks, the peremptory voices of locomotives quarrelling at the JunctionŚ all were gone. Even the children were silent now, afraid of the red, cold dawn. The roses all were dead, and the frost had blackened the summer shrubs and trees. The streets seemed empty as Kenniston drove the jeep down Main Street. Middletown had taken on, overnight, the aspect of a tomb. Smoke arose from every chimney, in the houses where the people crouched indoors, peering sometimes with pale faces framed in frost-rimed glass as the jeep went clattering by in the silence. From every church he passed came sounds of hymns and praying. The bars, too, were noisy, having apparently defied law to remain open all night.

Kenniston realized that this town was dying as it stood. Fuel would run out fast, and without it life could not survive these bitter nights. A feeling of utter hopelessness swept over him. It seemed ironic that Middletown should have come safely through the most staggering cataclysm in history, only to perish miserably of cold.

Dimly, in the back of his mind, a thought began to form. It tempered his hopelessness a little, but before he could get it clear, he had made the turn into Vine Street, and the Keystone coal yard lay before him. And at that place in this still and deathly city, there was life and noise enough.

Policemen and National Guardsmen formed a cordon around the yard and its great black heaps of coal. They faced a crowdŚ an ugly crowd, still only muttering, but bound for trouble. Kenniston saw people he knew in that crowd, people who sat on their front porches in the warm summer nights and talked with neighbors and laughed. Mill hands, merchants, housewivesŚ solid, decent folk, but turned wolfish now with the cold and the fear of dying.

Hubble met him inside the yard. A worried police sergeant was with him, and Borchard, who owned the yard.

ōThey were starting to loot the coal piles,ö Hubble said. ōPoor devils, it was summer and they didnÆt have much fuel. Some of them burned their furniture last night to keep alive.ö

Borchard said anxiously, ōWe donÆt want to have to kill anyone. And right now, theyÆll believe you scientists before anyone else.ö

Hubble nodded. ōYou talk to them, Ken. YouÆve gotten to know them better than I have, and theyÆll trust you more.ö

Kenniston said, ōThe hell they will. And anyway, whatÆll I say to them? æGo home and freeze to death quietly, like gentlefolk, and letÆs not have any nasty scenes.Æ TheyÆll love that.ö

ōMaybe they donÆt have to freeze,ö said Hubble. ōMaybe thereÆs an answer to that.ö

The half-formed thought in the back of KennistonÆs mind leaped forward. He looked at Hubble, and he knew that the older man had had that same thought, but sooner and clearer. A small flicker of hope began to stir again in Kenniston.

ōThe domed city,ö he said.

Hubble nodded. ōYes. It retains heat to a considerable degree, at night. We saw that. ThatÆs why the dome was builtŚ how long ago? No matter. ItÆs our only half-warm refuge. We have to go there, Ken, all of us. And soon! We canÆt go through many more nights here!ö

ōBut will they go? And if they do, whatÆll happen when they see that city and realize Earth is a dead world?ö

Hubble made an impatient gesture. ōWeÆll have to take care of that when it comes. The thing now is to give these people some hope. Tell them to wait in their homes, that soon theyÆll be safe. Tell them anything you like, but make them go!ö

Kenniston scrambled up a black ridge of coal, to stand above the crowd. From outside the cordon they snarled at him when he began. But he shouted them down, calling out the names of the ones he knew, ordering them to listenŚ being masterful, while his heart pounded with the same dread that drove the men and women in the street.

ōDonÆt talk to us about law when itÆs the end of the world!ö yelled a hard-faced woman.

ōItÆs the end of nothing unless you lose your heads,ö Kenniston hammered. ōThe Mayor is arranging now to give you what you wantŚ an answer to how youÆre going to live and be safe. Your lives and the lives of your families depend on how you cooperate. Go home to your radios and wait for the orders.ö

ōWill they give us coal?ö shouted a burly millhand.

ōCoal, food, everything you need. NobodyÆs going to cheat anyone. WeÆre all in the same boat. WeÆll stay in, or get out, together. Now go home and keep your families together and wait.ö

He called suddenly to the men on guard, ōYou, too! Get out of here and report back to your headquarters! The orders coming up are more important than this coal!ö

He climbed back down from the black heap, wondering whether his feeble attempt at psychology would work. Borchard started angry remonstrance about dismissal of the guards, but Hubble shut him up.

ōIt worked,ö he said. ōLook, theyÆre going.ö As the crowd dispersed, Chief of Police Kimer arrived. His unshaven face was gray from lack of sleep, his eyes red-rimmed. He did not seem to be much excited by the trouble at the coal yard.

ōWeÆve had a lot more than this on our hands, during the night,ö he said.

Kenniston learned then what had gone on in Middletown since the Mayor had finished speakingŚ the deaths from shock, the scattering of suicides, the outbreaks of looting in the downtown streets, quickly checked. A dozen people, mostly drunks, had died of cold.

ōBut the barricades at the edge of town were the worst,ö Kimer said tiredly. ōYou know, a good number of people from outside Middletown were trapped here by this thing. They, and some of our own people gone panicky, tried to stampede out of town.ö He added, as he turned back to his car, ōThey tell me more than two thousand people were baptized last night.ö

ōWeÆll go with you to City Hall,ö Hubble told him. ōYes, you too, Ken. IÆll need your help with the Mayor.ö

It seemed impossible that the pudgy little Mayor could be a problem. He had been so docile, so pathetically eager to take advice and follow orders. But when, in City Hall, Hubble confronted him with the plan to evacuate Middletown, Mayor GarrisÆ face took on a mulish look.

ōItÆs crazy,ö he said. ōTake up a whole city of fifty thousand people and transport them to another place we donÆt know anything about? ItÆs insane!ö

ōThere are enough cars, buses and trucks to transport the population and supplies. ThereÆs enough gasoline to run them.ö

ōBut this other cityŚ what do we know about it? Nothing. There might be any kind of danger there. No. I was born in Middletown. IÆve lived here all my life. IÆve worked hard to get where I am. I just spent five thousand dollars to redecorate my house, and IÆm not going to leave it.ö

He glared at them, and his plump body trembled. Hubble said gently, ōWeÆre all afraid, Mr. Garris. ItÆs a hard thing to do. People have their roots, and they canÆt break them easily all at once. But we must go. We must seek shelter, or die.ö

The Mayor shook his head. ōMy wife and daughterŚ theyÆve been hysterical all night, pleading with me to do something, to make things go as they always have. This has been an awful shock to them. I donÆt think they could stand any more.ö

ōSlap their faces, Mr. Garris,ö Hubble said brutally. ōThis has been a shock to all of us. Now what are you going to do? Will you call in the City Council or wonÆt you?ö

ōI canÆt, not on that proposal.ö GarrisÆ face crinkled like that of a child about to cry. ōHonestly, gentlemen, I canÆt.ö

Kenniston thought of Carol shivering in her fur coat, struggling with the last shovels of coal, and the thought made him grasp Garris savagely by the shirtfront.

ōAll right, donÆt,ö he snapped. ōThe people are waiting for an announcement from you, but IÆll make one myself. IÆll tell them that thereÆs a way to save them, but that Mayor Garris wonÆt hear of it. IÆll tell them they must die of cold because their Mayor wonÆt give up his big fine house with its cellarful of coal. Would you like me to tell them that, Mr. Garris?ö

Kenniston thought he had never seen a man turn so white. ōTheyÆd tear me to pieces,ö whispered Garris. ōNo. No, donÆt.ö He looked piteously from one to the other, and then he said, ōIÆll call in the Council.ö

The men of the Council reacted, at first, very much as the Mayor had done. Kenniston did not entirely blame them. The difficulties of uprooting a population of fifty thousand and moving it bodily in a short space of time to a place it had never seen nor heard of were enough to daunt anybody. But HubbleÆs arguments were unanswerable. It was move or die, and they knew it, and in the end the decision was made. A crushed, frightened little man, Mayor Garris went to make his announcement.

On the way to the broadcasting station, Kenniston looked at Middletown. The big houses, standing lordly on the North Side. The little houses, in close-set rows, with their tiny gardens. It was going to be hard, very hard. The people who lived in those houses would not want to leave them.

In a low, tired voice, bereft now of pomposity and guile, the Mayor spoke to the people of Middletown.

ōSo we must leave Middletown, temporarily,ö he concluded. And he repeated the word. ōTemporarily. The domed city out there will be a little cold too, but not so cold as unprotected Middletown. We can live there, untilŚ until things clear up. Stay by your radios. You will be given instructions. Please cooperate, to save all our lives. PleaseŚö