Chapter 2Ś the incredible
The rest of the staff was waiting for them when they came back into the Lab grounds. A dozen men, ranging in age from Crisci to old Beitz, standing shivering in the chill red sunlight in front of the building. Johnson was with them, waiting for his answer. Hubble looked at him, and at the others. He said, ōI think weÆd better go inside.ö

They did not ask the questions that were clamoring inside them. Silently, with the jerky awkward movements of men strung so taut that their reflex centers no longer function smoothly, they followed Hubble through the doorway. Kenniston went with them, but not all the way. He turned aside, toward his own office, and said, ōIÆve got to find out if Carol is all right.ö

Hubble said sharply. ōDonÆt tell her, Ken. Not yet.ö

ōNo,ö said Kenniston. ōNo, I wonÆt.ö

He went into the small room and closed the door. The telephone was on his desk, and he reached for it, and then he drew his hand away. The fear had altered now into a kind of numbness, as though it were too large to be contained within a human body and had ebbed away, carrying with it all the substances of strength and will as water carries sand. He looked at the black, familiar instrument and thought how improbable it was that there should still be telephones, and fat books beside them with quantities of names and numbers belonging to people who had lived once in villages and nearby towns, but who were not there any more, not sinceŚ how long? An hour or so, if you figured it one way. If you figured it anotherģ

He sat down in the chair behind the desk. He had done a lot of hard work sitting in that chair, and now all that work had ceased to matter. Quite a lot of things had ceased to matter. Plans, and ideas, and where you were going to go on your honeymoon, and exactly where you wanted to live, and in what kind of a house. Florida and California and New York were words as meaningless as ōyesterdayö and ōtomorrow.ö They were gone, the times and the places, and there wasnÆt anything left out of them but Carol herself, and maybe even Carol wasnÆt left, maybe sheÆd been out with her aunt for a little drive in the country, and if she wasnÆt in Middletown when it happened sheÆs gone, gone, goneģ

He took the phone in both hands and said a number over and over into it. The operator was quite patient with him. Everybody in Middletown seemed to be calling someone else, and over the roar and click of the exchange and the ghostly confusion of voices he heard the pounding of his own blood in his ears and he thought that he did not have any right to want Carol to be there, and he ought to be praying that she had gone somewhere, because why would he want anybody he loved to have to face what was ahead of them. And what was ahead of them? How could you guess which one, out of all the shadowy formless horrors that might beģ

ōKen?ö said a voice in his ear. ōKen, is that you? Hello!ö

ōCarol,ö he said. The room turned misty around him and there was nothing anywhere but that voice on the line.

ōIÆve been trying and trying to get you, Ken! What on earth happened? The whole town is excitedŚ I saw a terrible flash of lightning, but there wasnÆt any storm, and then that quakeģ Are you all right?ö

ōSure, IÆm fineģö She wasnÆt really frightened yet. Anxious, upset, but not frightened. A flash of lightning, and a quake. Alarming yes, but not terrifying, not the end of the worldģ He caught himself up, hard. He said, ōI donÆt know yet what it was.ö

ōCan you find out? Somebody must know.ö She did not guess, of course, that Kenniston was an atomic physicist. He had not been allowed to tell that to anyone, not even his fianc?e. To her, he was merely a research technician in an industrial laboratory, vaguely involved with test tubes and things. She had never questioned him very closely about his work, apparently content to leave all that up to him, and he had been grateful because it had spared him the necessity of lying to her. Now he was even more grateful, because she would not dream that he might have special information. That way, he could spare her a little longer, get himself in hand before he told her. ōIÆll do my best,ö he told her. ōBut until weÆre sure, I wish you and your aunt would stay in the house, off the street. No, I donÆt think your bridge-luncheon will come off anyway. And you canÆt tell what people will do when theyÆre frightened. Promise? YesŚ yes, IÆll be over as soon as I can.ö

He hung up, and as soon as that contact with Carol was broken, reality slipped away from him again. He looked around the office, and it became suddenly rather horrible, because it had no longer any meaning. He had an urgent wish to get out of it, yet when he rose he stood for some while with his hands on the edge of the desk, going over HubbleÆs words in his mind, remembering how the Sun had looked, and the stars, and the sad, alien Earth, knowing that it was all impossible but unable to deny it. The long hall of time, and a shattering forceģ He wanted desperately to run away, but there was no place to run to. Presently he went down the corridor to HubbleÆs office.

They were all there, the twelve men of the staff, and Johnson. Johnson had gone by himself into a corner. He had seen what lay out there beyond the town, and the others had not. He was trying to understand it, to understand the fact and the explanation of it he had just heard. It was not a pleasant thing, to watch him try. Kenniston glanced at the others. He had worked closely with these men. He had thought he knew them all so well, having seen them under stress, in the moments when their work succeeded and the others when it did not. Now he realized that they were all strangers, to him and to each other, alone and wary with their personal fears.

Old Beitz was saying, almost truculently, ōEven if it were true, you canÆt say exactly how long a time has passed. Not just from the stars.ö

Hubble said, ōIÆm not an astronomer, but anyone can figure it from the tables of known star-motions, and the change in the constellations. Not exactly, no. But as close as will ever matter.ö

ōBut if the continuum were actually shattered, if this town has actually jumped millions of yearsģö BeitzÆ voice trailed off. His mouth began to twitch and he seemed suddenly bewildered by what he was saying, and he, and all of them, stood looking at Hubble in a haunted silence.

Hubble shook his head. ōYou wonÆt really believe, until you see for yourselves. I donÆt blame you. But in the meantime, youÆll have to accept my statement as a working hypothesis.ö

Morrow cleared his throat and asked, ōWhat about the people out thereŚ the town? Are you going to tell them?ö

ōTheyÆll have to know at least part of it,ö Hubble said. ōItÆll get colder, very much colder, by night, and theyÆll have to be prepared for it. But there must not be any panic. The Mayor and the Chief of Police are on their way here now, and weÆll work it out with them.ö

ōDo they know yet, themselves?ö asked Kenniston, and Hubble said, ōNo.ö

Johnson moved abruptly. He came up to Hubble and said, ōI donÆt get all this scientific talk about space and time. What I want to know isŚ is my boy safe?ö

Hubble stared at him. ōYour boy?ö

ōHe went out to MartinsenÆs farm early, to borrow a cultivator. ItÆs two miles out the north road. What about him, Mr. HubbleŚ is he safe?ö

That was the secret agony that had been riding him, the one he had not voiced. Hubble said gently. ōI would say that you donÆt have to worry about him at all, Johnson.ö

Johnson nodded, but still looked worried. He said, ōThanks, Mr. Hubble. IÆd better go back now. I left my wife in hysterics.ö

A minute or two after he left, Kenniston heard a siren scream outside. It swung into the Lab yard and stopped. ōThat,ö said Hubble, ōwould be the Mayor.ö

A small and infirm reed to lean upon, thought Kenniston, at a time like this. There was nothing particularly wrong about Mayor Garris. He was no more bumbling, inefficient, or venal than the average mayor of any average small city. He liked banquets and oratory, he worried about the right necktie, and he was said to be a good husband and father. But Kenniston could not, somehow, picture Bertram Garris shepherding his people safely across the end of the world. He thought so even less when Garris came in, his bones well padded with the plump pink flesh of good living, his face the perfect pattern of the successful little man who is pleased with the world and his place in it. Just now he was considerably puzzled and upset, but also rather elated at the prospect of something important going on. Kimer, the Chief of Police, was another matter. He was a large angular man with a face that had seen many grimy things and had learned from them a hard kind of wisdom. Not a brilliant man, Kenniston thought, but one who could get things done. And he was worried, far more worried than the Mayor. Garris turned immediately to Hubble. It was obvious that he had a great respect for him and was proud to be on an equal footing with such an important person as one of the nationÆs top atomic scientists. ōIs there any news yet, Doctor Hubble? We havenÆt been able to get a word from outside, and the wildest rumors are going around. I was afraid at first that you might have had an explosion here in the laboratory, butģö

Kimer interrupted him. ōTalk is going around that an atomic bomb hit here, Doctor Hubble. Some of the people are getting scared. If enough of them get to believe it, weÆll have a panic on our hands. IÆve got our officers on the streets soothing æem down, but IÆd like to have a straight story theyÆll believe.ö

ōAtomic bomb!ö said Mayor Garris. ōPreposterous. WeÆre all alive, and thereÆs been no damage. Doctor Hubble will tell you that atomic bombsģö

For the second time he was cut short. Hubble broke in sharply. ōWeÆre not dealing with an ordinary bomb. And the rumors are true, as far as they go.ö He paused, and went on more slowly, making every word distinct, ōA super-atomic was exploded an hour ago, for the first time in history, right here.ö

He let that sink in. It was a lingering and painful process, and while it was going on Kenniston looked away, up through the window at the dusky sky and the sullen red Sun, and felt the knot in his stomach tighten. We were warned, he thought. We were all warned for years that we were playing with forces too big for us.

ōIt didnÆt destroy us,ö Hubble was saying. ōWeÆre lucky that way. But it did have certainŚ effects.ö

ōI donÆt understand,ö said the Mayor piteously. ōI simply donÆtŚ Certain effects? What?ö

Hubble told him, with quiet bluntness.

The Mayor and the Chief of Police of Middletown, normal men of a normal city, adjusted to life in a normal world, listening to the incredible. Listening, trying to comprehendŚ trying, and failing, and rejecting it utterly.

ōThatÆs insane,ö said Garris angrily. ōMiddletown thrown into the future? Why, the very sound of itģ What are you trying to do, Doctor Hubble?ö

He said a great deal more than that. So did Kimer. But Hubble wore them down. Quietly, implacably, he pointed to the alien landscape around the town, the deepening cold, the red, aged Sun, the ceasing of all wire and radio communication from outside. He explained, sketchily, the nature of time and space, and how they might be shattered. His scientific points they could not understand. But those they took on faith, the faith which the people of the Twentieth Century had come to have in the interpreters of the complex sciences they themselves were unable to comprehend. The physical facts they understood well enough. Too well, once they were forced to it.

It got home at last. Mayor Garris sank down into a chair, and his face was no longer pink, and the flesh sagged on it. His voice was no more than a whimper when finally he asked, ōWhat are we going to do?ö

Hubble had an answer ready, to a part of that question, at least. ōWe canÆt afford a panic. The people of Middletown will have to learn the truth slowly. That means that none of them must go outside the town yetŚ or theyÆd learn at once. IÆd suggest you announce the area outside town is possibly radioactive contaminated, and forbid anyone to leave.ö

Police Chief Kimer grasped with pathetic eagerness at the necessity of coping with a problem he could comprehend. ōI can put men and barricades at all the street-ends, to see to that.ö

ōAnd our local National Guard company is assembling now at the Armory,ö put in Mayor Garris. His voice was shaky, his eyes still stunned.

Hubble asked, ōWhat about the cityÆs utilities?ö

ōEverything seems to be workingŚ power, gas and water,ö the Mayor answered.

They would, Kenniston thought. MiddletownÆs coal-steam electric generation plant, and its big watertower, and its artificial gas plant, had all come through time with them.

ōThey, and all food and fuel, must be rationed,ö Hubble was saying. ōProclaim it as an emergency measure.ö

Mayor Garris seemed to feel a little better at being told what to do. ōYes. WeÆll do that at once.ö Then he asked, timidly, ōIsnÆt there any way of getting in touch with the rest of the country?ö

ōThe rest of the country,ö Hubble reminded him, ōis some millions of years in the dead past. YouÆll have to keep remembering that.ö

ōYesŚ of course. I keep forgetting,ö said the Mayor. He shivered, and then took refuge in the task set him. ōWeÆll get busy at once.ö

When the car had borne the two away, Hubble looked haggardly at his silent colleagues.

ōTheyÆll talk, of course. But if the news spreads slowly, it wonÆt be so bad. ItÆll give us a chance to find out a few things first.ö

Crisci began to laugh, a little shrilly. ōIf itÆs true, this is a side-splitting joke! This whole town flung into the end of the world and not even knowing it yet! All these fifty thousand people, not guessing yet that their Cousin Agnes in Indianapolis has been dead and dust for millions of years!ö

ōAnd they mustnÆt guess,ö Hubble said. ōNot yet. Not until we know what we face in this future Earth.ö

He went on, thinking aloud. ōWe need to see whatÆs out there, outside the town, before we can plan anything. Kenniston, will you get a jeep and bring it back here? Bring spare gasoline, and some warm clothing, too. WeÆll need it out there. And KenŚ bring two guns.ö