A Time Travel story

I want to write a dramatic recap that is a time travel story. The "time travel" trope has been exhausted, but since this is The Atomic Zone, we don't care so here is another one.


Information:

(this is just for you to adapt into the rambling speech and visual flashbacks that the man on his death bed recounts, not necessarily in his own words, but in a description of the things he is trying to say)

Settings:

1. The alternate "future" of 2037 that was caused by the time traveler
2. The regular, expected future of 2037
3. The common past of 1912 France, in Normandy
4. Aboard the Titanic, safe, happy, everything is fine. 

Characters:

1. A Mysterious old man on his death bed. He was a great man, leader of the whole world in the alternate timeline.  He is extremely old by modern standards but we do not specify. But if you do the math, he's around 160.
2. A dashing and brave young test subject, probably an astronaut, fit, intelligent, handsome. He is actually the old man in the alternate timeline, but You will have to tell the story as if the old man and his young self are two different people.  Refer to the old man as "The Mysterous Dying Old Man" and then the young man as a distinct character. This way Fliki doesn't confuse the 2 characters when generating images.
3. A lab assistant in the regular timeline, probably a formidable scientist but acting to assist the main character
4. A beautiful woman, another test subject, probably an astronaut, fit, intelligent, and striking. She is the same person in both 1912 and the regular 2037.  

How time travel works in this story:

In our own timeline, in 2037, there is a time machine in a lab.  The main character uses it to go back to 1912.
It would not matter what he did in 1912, because in order to get back to the future, all he would need to do to initiate the return procedure is press a button on his watch.
If here were to remove, destroy, or break his watch, the return procedure would engage automatically and he would reappear in the present time.
The return procedure will reverse anything he did, rolling back time like a reel, and he would return to the present from the moment he appeared in the past, seeming to have done nothing.
This completely prevents any tampering with the past.  But it's not safeguard, it's just actually how the time travel works.  He is projected into the past, in sort of a bubble, that recoils back to the time-hole.
It would also anything physically that might happen to him, but he should be able to recall whatever he witnessed because we need that to be possible for the story to happen.
The only problem is, he can never remove his watch, or everything will suddenly undo and he will return to the present.  Or if he dies...

About this story:



Now the story begins, Man on deathbed.  He is extremely old by modern standards, confessing to his great-great-grandchildren (maybe a man and a woman) with doctors around him.

(The architecture and clothing style is all like how people 100 years ago picture the year 2037 would be)

So he says that he was a time traveler, from right about now, but the world was a different place.

The world is not how you know it.  There were never any world wars, communism never existed, and science evolved in 
the way that only a pulp function scifi writer from the 1930's could have ever envisioned it

The man confesses to his great-great-daughter (or something) that this world is not the world he came from

He describes the hellscape that was the real 20th century

He was an astronaut in this other fantastic hellscape, and had been assigned to test a time travel machine, in France of all places.

He was to explore, and then return.

But in France, he meets a beautiful woman, falls in love at first sight, and decides to stay in the past. His love is irrational, all consuming, as if no greater love had ever been.

He learns that she is about to board the Titanic, and out of love, he joins her and prevents the ship from sinking.

So, in the past, he uses his knowledge of the future to completely and utterly change the world.

He created a modern age, many decades before it really happened naturally. He prevented all of the wars, communism, and other bad things. He invented scientific wonders, particularly in air travel.

He brought about all of the amazing, astounding sci-fi things that we've only read on the pages of science fiction magazines and novels from the 1930's 40's and 50's. Rockets, Robots, undersea colonies, etc etc etc


Now, the auto reversal would only happen if he dies, or removes the watch.

But he stayed because he fell in love, saved the titanic, got married, lived happily ever after, changed the future, led the world to a retro-futuristic fantasy age.

but now he's about to die, and all that is going to be undone.

He even tries to convince the doctors to save the world by putting him on life support and then somehow surgically grafting his hand .. but it just comes out like crazy talk

Nobody believes him.

So his extended family, all futuristic and everything, in a retro sci-fi "the year is 2037" style, sits with him on his deathbed until he eventually succumbs.

Then, in a whirlwind, time reverse it self in just seconds.  

Everything that happened in this timeline since 1912 unravels in reverse until the moment in which he arrived at the time portal in Normandy, and he suddenly reappears in the "Real" 2037, young again, but sick, confused.

The scientist/lab assistant is waiting for him.  "You were only gone for a second.  What happened?"

He collapses and drops his head into his hands crying "It's all gone. All gone. All gone"

His assistant and a the beautiful young woman help him to a chair, and that's when he realizes that the beautiful young woman is the woman he met on the Titanic, married, and lived a lifetime with.

Only, she is in a "time travel" jumpsuit and announces that she was supposed to try the time machine next, but now there's no way she's getting in there now. 

Then she whispers to the assistant, as our main character is still unable to bring himself back into conscious reality, "Is this the other test pilot you hired?  He's cute! I hope he's okay!"

Wax poetically about how no one can see the future, because that is not our destiny.  It is not how, why or for what reason we were created. The future must be unknown and we can never know why.

"But this is the Atomic Zone, and although the wonderful world he had hoped could exist forever is gone, and the terrible modern age he tried to flee has been restored, Love still finds a way."


