The Pill

Our story begins the day after tomorrow.  Or, whenever.

Life on Earth is a Utopia.

(Describe a place where people are happy, life is perfect, the world is clean, and everyone is happy, heaalthy, loving, peaceful and prosperous. Almost comically so, in the most unrealist ways imagineble without distracting the reader from the story)


How did this happen?

A pill.  A simple red pill, or a blue pill, depending on your choice.

You see, in a time when the world was burning with chaos, tribalism, and war, a group of brilliant scientists and visionaries came together to create a solution. They developed a revolutionary technology that allowed them to create a parallel universe, a perfect replica of our own world, but without the flaws and problems that plagued it.

Scientists learned the under certain conditions, if a person's personal choice resulted in their death, a parallel universe would be created in which they did not die.

What's more, they discovered that the specific choices and manner of the death could be controlled at the quantum level, and that there was a way to control which parallel universe that a particular choice would align with.

So they created two pills, one red and one blue, with a simple particle in each.  The particle would be able to control the choice of the parallel universe.

If the red pill was chosen, the science would result in the death of the person, but they would live on in the parallel universe.

And the same for the blue pill.

People could now choose which half of the world they wanted to accompany them into the future.  They could choose to live in a world of war, disease, and suffering, or they could choose to live in a world of peace, health, and prosperity.

Based on their tribal inclinations.

And so half of the world took the red pill, and half of the world took the blue pill.

Everyone lived happily ever after, in a world that was both beautiful and wonderful, with only the people they agreed with politically.

But it was a ruse.

The scientists had no such science.  One of the pills was poison, and the other, a mere placebo.

A vast right wing, or perhaps a left wing conspiracy had rid the world of the enemy. The people with the problemmatic beliefs. The people who were simply wrong about everything.

All gone, all dead.

And so, a utopian world was born. Everyone was happy.  Everyone got along, had the right ideas, the right opinions, and the right information about everything.

Everyone lived happily ever after.

Well, not entirely.. Because this is the Atomic Zone, and the Parallel universe they created isn't really the Utopia the think it is, because while the idyllic universe they create no long her war, pestulence, disease or political tribalism, id does have .. Zombies!

(Describe zombies, the people who took the poison pill, all rise from their graves and eat everyone alive, in a horrible, unimaginable bloody massacre.)

Conclusion, over a montage of eaten people, struck down in the middle of doing ordinary utopian things like weaving a basket, playing a lute, painting a picture (the picture they were painting is really untalented and bad), or holding hands and drinking a coke.

Phrase this in a "Rod Serling" way, poetic, thoughtful and poignant:


While people still dream of a utopia, these dreams are a fantasy. But the dream still has meaning, and the only to truly realize it is to be more accepting of the people who are outside of the bubble you live in.

etc, etc

Fade to black.

pause

JUMP SCARE ZOMBIE WITH ROAR

