xx
A story about a world where people live, eat, sleep, work and exercise all in the same place, they are told what to do by an AI, their lives are micro-managed yet they are also given vast
amounts of free time to explore knowledge and persue enjoyment (albeit limited in scope and variety). All of their needs are met, yet they are constantly challenged, and very healthy both
physically and mentally. Outside of their living area, the Earth thrives as a beautiful garden of nature which is tended to by robots, who also farm and harvast the resources needed for the
people in the redoubt to survive. Yes, it's the biggest trope ever, including the band of rebellious underground freedom fighters who blah blah blah blah blah. The challenge is, what do you
do with this story that nobody would ever expect? Zombies!!


xx
Skit: "Nothing"
The story begins with a a small group of random people who we will come to realize have died and are in some kind of afterlife, milling about in a dreamlike environment.
A voice suddenly calls them to pass through a mysterious door way, which appears.
Then we have a montage of the people being interviewed by a mysterious being in some kind of dreamlike environment.

The interviewer asks each person the same question:
"Based on your experience, your lifetime as a human being, what do you believe is going to happen in the afterlife?"
We then see each of the people, bewildered, attempting to answer the question to the best of their ability.
Each person gives a different answer, from "Nothing", to a variety of things like heaven, reincarnation, hell, visions of a spirit world, etc

At the end, there is a montage of of the conclusion of each interview.
To the "Heaven", "Hell", "Reincarnation" people, he corrects them a little bit, wishes them well on their journey and then announces that they move on.
To the "Nothing" person, he simply pronouces: "Nothing it is". The person fades away into nothingness.
The closing narration says something like "They say we create our own reality. Even Quantum Mechanics is a theory that this may be true. Perhaps what you believe in is the ultimate reality."


The Atomic Zone ep. 2 - "Something is Coming" from AtomicFlix.com - After a woman’s murder is disguised as misfortune, the men who profited from her death begin to meet a gruesome end one by one, each raving that “something is coming.” In the sweltering shadows of 1950s Louisiana, greed, guilt, and superstition collide as the last man standing learns that justice may arrive from a place darker than death.


xx
A game where the UI is lots of floating eye-holes.
You zoom into any one of them to become a player in a random game. But you are an NPC in someone else's game.
The actualy product is a game where lots and lots of people can join in as NPCs in games that other people are playing.
Eventually, people start becoming obsessed with the game and start playing it all day and night and it becomes a game that everyone wants to play.
People start arranging their lives around the game in freakishly shocking ways, such has using an IV for hydration and then nutrition to help them survive.
People use drugs to put them into sensory deprivation, and electic shock to keep their muscles from becoming atrophed.
People use drugs to inhibit their own long term memory so the games seem more real, dreamlike, and they don't have to worry about remembering their real life.
People start using the game as a form of escapism, but also as a form of entertainment, socialization, and even work.
The game becomes so immersive and addictive that it starts to blur the lines between reality and fantasy, and people start to question what is real and what is not.
The game becomes a cultural phenomenon, with people from all walks of life joining in and creating their own unique experiences within the game.
The game becomes a reflection of society itself, with all its complexities, contradictions, and beauty.
Cut forward 1000 years.  Aliens land on Earth.  They discover the mummified corpses of people plugged into their games.
The lament, another dead planet, cursed by the "Great Filter"


xx
The Dead Bobs Club: The story begins with Bob, an older adult, getting unalived in some kind of accident. He lands in a sort of purgatory but there are many people there. Cut back to the
time of the accident but Bob didn't die. He continues on with his life mostly disregarding his near-death accident.
Then cut back to Dead Bob who realizes that he's surrounded by many versions of himself at a variety of ages. He discovers that they are all the same person but only up to the
age in which that version of him passed away. They can observe the continuation of Alive Bob but cannot communicate with him in any way.
They discuss their collective past life. Even though they've all been privvy to the ongoing development of Alive Bob,
each of them is somewhat still locked into the personality, maturity and general disposition of the version of Bob who existed at the moment his life ended.
Dead Bob learns that when he died, the universe split and in one timeline he is dead but in another he lives on.
Almost none of the Dead Bobs remember their death, similar to how if you get knocked out your brain may not store unprocessed short term memory leading up to the event.
I think that is true.
Maybe some of the Dead Bobs were aware that they were going to die, but still don't actually remember the moment of death, and the main Dead Bob only remembers driving to work, but not being in an accident.
Again, the purpose of this story is for the past versions of Bob to ruminate about his life journey, but to also highlight how each of the Dead Bobs still exists within Alive Bob,
even if only faintly.
They realize the Alive Bob is now in danger, and they take turns mentioning how they know that he is in danger and if only they could communicate with him they could save him.
Then Alive Bob manages to save himself, using a combination of the Dead Bobs' knowledge of his past because he has the wisdom of all of them, because he IS them

xx
A story about a man who figures out that he can imprint his consciousness onto any inanimate object, starting with a programmer's rubber duck, but then extending to stuffed animals and things around his house and town.
Only in this instance he has some kind of psychic abilities where it's more than just rubberduckery, because the things can observe even when he's not around, and then give him a sense of what they observed when he
checks back in with them. As a child he had a sense of this and when he tried to talk about it, it was sort of beaten out of him so he just doesn't talk about it or even wonder about it because it's just "of course".
His minions include a street light, a river that tells him there are many missing people in cars in it, which he never reveals, but hears about divers finding them and just goes yup. His mailbox also talks to him,
a clock, a refridgerator magnet, and maybe a fan that he has to replace using a katra ceremony so he doesn't feel bad. He _knows_ it's all in his head but you have to wonder because there are too many coincidences
I don't have a plot tho .. just a bunch of character arcs, partly as seen by the inanimate objects and his conversations with them. Like he has dying brother that he convinces to impress his consciousness onto something
without actually explaining (because that would sound crazy) and then after the brother passes away he believes that he has placed his brothers consciousness into a video game


I'd like to see a skit where historical characters argue point and counterpoint on a subject contemporary people would find horrifying from any perspective, like breaking the legs of a person you just crucified


Tagged. A skit where people are tagged and almost start to notice it


Skit where a man faces heavenly judgement and is expecting the worst because he feels like we led a bad life but has to learn that A/forgiveness and grace thing but also B/he was never really bad but everyone around him was evil AF and they all thought they were being included as witnesses but in actuality they are the ones on trial
Only the rich get good lawyers.consider me your public defender. How do you get rich in heaven? Ever heard of storing up riches in heaven? Good deeds mister. Seems to be something you're sorry lacking on the books
He's actually the prosecutor. The defender is actually the one reading the charges. End of act 1 he learns abt grace. Act 2 prosecutor reveals himself and accuses man with this he learned in confidence like he was always a believer but had to play the cards he was dealt .. always a believer? That makes him 10 times worse etc etc then act 3 the prosecutor is actually his defender and starts destroying the "witnesses"


A skit where people from the "Good" universe are trying to infiltrate the "Evil" universe (or vice versa might be better) but they get stuck in the "Lame" universe which is ours and being stuck here they must try to
guess which universe each person they encounter is from but they can't because from everyone's perspective its oh fuckit thats dumb


A skit about people arguing over whether or not there existed an advanced civilation before us. But what the Pros are arguing is that this theoretical civilization was actually in the 1900's and the cons are like no way, its fake
"They even had their own form of what we know today as the internet" (holds up picture of a modem or something)
Shows pictures of many old people giving lectures "How could so many old people all have known so much at the same time? Coincidence?"



The skit is about a man who visits a mental hospital (for some official reason) and all of the patients are insane, but not insane in a realistic sense, they are insane like how a car salesman would pretend to be insane
in a TV ad, like that Mad Max guy from the 80's ("our prices are insaaaaaaane!Wh") and the protagonist is like "hey, these people are ALL faking!" and then some stuff heppens


Something where the twist is "We've always promoted the idea of a 'Hell' in their religions. It makes it a lot easier to explain the part that comes next for all of them."


A man dies and wakes up somewhere. An attendent warns him that he'll be a little disoriented for a while. Then some men show up claiming to be his buddies and ribbing him about being disoriented, and doing random things
to try to get him to come around, wake up, remember who he is.  The man babbles a little about his family, kids, wife, mundane things a normal person might lament about in his first moments of the the after life. Also the
attendant is trying to get them to give him some time but the men are relentless and bullying in a brotherly sort of way. Finally the punch line comes when they announce that he had been on "Vacation" -- That's it's time
to get serious again, get back to work. The man tries to protest, referring to his long life and struggles as a human but the men point out _how_ he should be able to realize that he had been on vacation -- that he was
born into relative peacetime, in a wealthy country, in an average family, as an average person, with average ambition and average talent, and that he had lived a very comfortable and average life mostly free of any kind
of trauma or hardship, and that he had gone skiing, hiking, saw lots of sites, drank alcohol, had sex, watched thousands of movies, got into fights, ate some of the best food ever cooked, played with some amazing toys,
had the best housing, clothes, clean water and medicine, and just enough challenges to give him a long life. The man thinks, then smiles, "Yeah it was pretty nice." Then he gets serious. "Ok, what are we working on?"
^ the sound fades as the buddies throw out some comments like "Colonization of these five exo-planets..." and "This next leader will need to rise from the most humble beginnings..." and "Well, the next war is gonna be..."


A skit where employees are being trained on how to report a problem to IT, i.e.  "Nothing is working", use the word "Keeps", or "Comes up and says Error", "Nothing on the screen", "Bunch of gobbledeygook",
The more times you report something the faster it will get resolved.  The more you exaggurate the problem the faster it will get resolved. Refer what you are doing generically as "It" i.e. "It says..", "It's still not.."
as if IT always knows who you are and what you are doing right now






Skit: Man tells friend that their 4th grade school principal Mr. Smith is going to be at the party.
Friend imagines himself being introduced to Mr. Smith at the party where Mr. Smith so big that his head and shoulders are out of frame
Man then introduces Mr Smith for real and he's actually kind of short and the friend is confused because he remembers Mr. Smith being a giant




IT HAS COME TO OUR ATTENTION THAT users of the Earth Sim have been engaging in unsanctioned forms of competition and mis-use of the platform, as well as some engineers, hackers and other clever users taking advantage of
special knowledge of the game physics and hidden features to give themselves an unfair advantage with """ Magic """ and unsportsmanlike tips, tricks and traps.  Therefore, effective immediately all players will only be
able to use the mental capacities of their characters and enter the game with no foreknowledge or advanced cognitive thinking to give them an unfair edge against the other regular playing competetors.  In order to help
facilitate this change we have amplified the cognitive abillities of then one specific species that all players may select and use within the game.  This will give you reason, logic, memory and problem solving skills
similar to the average player's own actual intelligence, however there will be no access to any prior "real" memories or special knowledge other than what can be learned and developed by the players from within the game.
Thank you, and have a nice day.



A skit where 2 competing prospective leaders of a hypothetical land are intelligently debating policy. Then it's time to go live (on air, stage, whatever) and they dumb it down so much that it's infantile
Then you show the population arguing amongst themselves with the infantile things with occasionally someone saying something that intelligently reflects the views of their candidate and the dumbstruck crowd
pelts the smart person with dumb insults and then continues their arguing will the smart person just gapes until another smart person (or one of the candidates) tells him with a shrug:
"Welcome to democracy! What are ya gonna do?"



Skit: "The Job"
A man goes to work and he is led to a machine where he has to stand and rotate a wheel 2 levers like pedals on a bicycle.
(Several times during this skit he takes his hands off of the handles/pedals and someone puts his hands back on them, indicating that without direction he really doesn't know what he's doing)
All day every day he pumps the wheel. Sometimes someone yells at him for not doing it right. Mostly someone passes by telling him he's doing great and the man grins stupidly
Sometimes you show him at him home where his arms are tired and his wive brings him a drink, rubs his arms, but is also drinking herself (much more than him)
Throw in a scene where he is being set up to work from home. People are installing a wheel machine in his house and he is led to it, someone puts his hands on the handles and he starts pumping
A face on a screen tells him how well he's doing and he smiles. His wife stumbles by in the background with a drink, not happy that he's in the house
The man is older, at work, pumping away.  His machine is replaced with another one. He is confused. Someone places his hands on the handles of the new machine and he starts pumping. Great job! He smiles
Now he's really old, at home, nothing to do. His wife is nodding drunkenly in the background staring at him.  He sees his old work-from-home machine althoug it's no longer connected to anything.
He pumps it pointlessly and looks around for someone to tell him he's doing a great job but all he sees is his batty old wife nodding pointlessly with her drink, a bitter look on her face
the man finally sits back, away from the machine, and looks around the dark, pointless room.
(The point of this skit is that the man spent his entire life doing something utterly useless and now that he is old, there is nothing for him to do, or even think about,
and that you should find a self-directed purpose that grows with you and doesn't require validation of other people )



The skit is some people die and are in an afterlife waiting room. Now that they are dead they have total recall and can see their own entire lives in complete perspective and are feeling like hell.
Most of them are very upset because they realize what jerks they were. One is okay because he died young and really didn't do much and doesn't have anything to reflect on.
One of them is old like the others but he is somewhat contented.
The punch line is that he was a jerk too, but because he was a christian he feels forgiven for being a jerk and is therefore already in heaven.



A series where each episode is the aftermath of some movie.. like, for instance, king kong is dead on the street, and now some people have to clean it up



Short chapter stories in the form of a time traveler who goes to the past and has very interesting conversations
with the people but the focus of the story is what the time traveler says to the people in the past and not the other way around, as he explains what
is about to happen in the future and the people react intelligently.  I don't think that's ever been done. This lets the reader empathize with the
"past people" in a new way, not "understanding their time through their eyes" but rather "understanding the shock of how the future will unfold"


Skit: "Devils Advocate"
Boss: Does anyone have any thoughts on the project?
VP: Just playing Devil's Advocate here, what are we gonna do when the gov't comes in and shuts us down because this could clearly be misconstrued as a form of unlicensed gambling?
Boss: Anyone else?
Jr VP: I'll spend some time reviewing the regulatory requirements to make sure that we don't run into any issues down the line.
Boss: Great. Also, Don't ever use the term "Devil's Advocate" in my company. VP, you're fired.  Jr VP, you're the VP now.



A funny skit where some founding fathers are brainstorming taxes and then someone gives a super long complicated suggestion (That is our real tax code)
 and everyone is like alrighty then "AIGHT" "Did you get all that?"


AI video where I explain things to my 80's self (like how they ruined Star Wars etc)


A retrospective on David LOL


It would be cool to recreate the final battle in Star Wars with Federation shuttles for x-wings and that ST3 space station for the death star

cinematic film still A blurry image of a flight attendant (23 years old, Female, Caucasian. Pale skin, neutral undertones, visible pores, uneven skin tone. Heart-shaped face, delicate jawline, small nose, green, wide eyes. Airline Flight Attendant. Blonde hair, frizzy flyaways, split ends, long, loosely styled. Teal polyester flight attendant uniform, slightly wrinkled, standard fit. Small silver earrings.) offering water to a dazed pilot in a dimly lit cockpit, complete darkness outside of the cockpit windows, seen from [Samir Rahman]'s (27 years old, Male, Airline Pilot, Middle Eastern. Light brown skin, yellow undertones, visible pores, slight acne scarring. Oval face, weak chin, aquiline nose, brown, deep-set eyes. Dark brown hair, slightly greasy, receding hairline, short, messy style. Faded blue cotton pilot shirt, wrinkled, ill-fitting, black tie. Metal framed glasses.) perspective. Deep blues, muted grays, stark whites, dramatic shadows. shallow depth of field, vignette, highly detailed, high budget, bokeh, cinemascope, moody, epic, gorgeous, film grain, grainy

showing complete and total blackness outside the cockpit windows

cinematic film still, an external shot of a white, long-haul wide-body airliner violently rolling and pitching up against a black, featureless sky, appearing completely out of control, Deep blues, muted grays, stark whites, dramatic shadows, shallow depth of field, vignette, highly detailed, high budget, bokeh, cinemascope, moody, epic, gorgeous, film grain, grainy

